---
title: "We Have A New Sponsor"
url: "https://blog.wireshark.org/2022/01/we-have-a-new-sponsor/"
date: "Thu, 13 Jan 2022 16:48:56 +0000"
author: ""
feed_url: "https://blog.wireshark.org/index.xml"
---
<p>I’m excited to announce that Wireshark has a new home. I recently accepted a job with Sysdig, and along with that, they are now Wireshark’s primary sponsor.</p>
<p>I’m excited for a couple of reasons. First, I get to work with Sysdig’s founder, Loris Degioanni. We’ve been friends for a long time, and it’s difficult to summarize the impact he’s had on Wireshark. We first met in the early days of the project, back when it was still called Ethereal. At the time he was busy developing the WinPcap packet capture library, which was a natural fit for Ethereal and let us include Windows users in our community. This was a pivotal milestone for the project and it helped us grow into what it is today.</p>
<p>This isn’t the first time he’s asked me to join a company he founded. In 2006, my family and I moved halfway across the U.S. where I joined him at CACE Technologies and he welcomed us to our new town. We renamed the project to Wireshark and proceeded to build a line of products that complemented it. This was another pivotal time for Wireshark. We started hosting SharkFest, our developer and user conference. It allows the community to meet and share ideas in person, and it’s hard to overstate its importance to the project. I was (finally!) able to work on Wireshark full time, and with the help of our wonderful community, it grew to be the world’s most popular network protocol analyzer.</p>
<p>I’m also excited because Wireshark has a great sponsor in Sysdig. I was delighted to find that he’s built a wonderful company culture here. Everyone I’ve met is bright and creative, and open source is a huge part of the company and its culture. They sponsor the Sysdig system visibility tool (which Loris created) and the Falco runtime security tool. As part of Sysdig I’ll be applying what I’ve learned about low-level visibility to cloud environments.</p>
<p>Sysdig’s sponsorship will ensure that Wireshark and its community continues to grow. Wireshark has a wonderful community of users, developers, and educators and the work they do is important. Sysdig is cognizant of that and committed to supporting that community. They will continue to host SharkFest and support the community that builds and delivers the world’s best protocol analyzer.</p>
<p>Finally, I’d like to thank Riverbed for being such a great sponsor for so many years prior to this. Wireshark has been fortunate over its lifetime to have sponsors dedicated to supporting its community, and Riverbed deserves recognition for being a huge part of that.</p>
<h2 id="comments">Comments <a class="anchor" href="#comments">🔗</a></h2><h3 id="comment-by-tony-fortunato-on-2022-01-14-134108-0000">Comment by tony fortunato on 2022-01-14 13:41:08 +0000 <a class="anchor" href="#comment-by-tony-fortunato-on-2022-01-14-134108-0000">🔗</a></h3><p>great to hear and excited to see what the future will hold.</p>
<h3 id="comment-by-al-swanke-on-2022-01-14-153432-0000">Comment by Al Swanke on 2022-01-14 15:34:32 +0000 <a class="anchor" href="#comment-by-al-swanke-on-2022-01-14-153432-0000">🔗</a></h3><p>This is awesome! Congratulations Gerald!</p>
